# The Semantic Web is Dead
## Long Live the Semantic Web!

The Semantic Web is rarely mentioned these days, so seldom that the
declaration of its death could be met by most of a younger generation
of programmers with a question: "The Semantic Who?"

This change in status is significant, but in some ways the Semantic
Web was on life-support since inception, and it continued to survive
only with the medical intervention of academic departments who had no
need to produce useable software or solve serious industry needs.

That's not to say that Semantic Web technologies *never* served any
industry needs. They certainly did so, but their penetration was
limited. And this limited penetration was not the result of mere
ignorance on the part of data architects or software engineers. It was
almost entirely the fault of deep problems with the ideas in the
Semantic Web itself.

## Why is the Semantic Web a Great Idea

The Semantic Web's demise is a tragedy, because we need the Semantic
Web. But as with all things in life, one must adapt or die, and the
adaptations of the Semantic Web were late, ill advised, and did not
address the core problems which led it to be the wrong approach in the
first place.

Why do we need the Semantic Web? Because distributed, interoperable,
well defined data is literally the most *central* problem for the
current and near future human economy. Knowledge is power, and
distributable, actionable knowledge, creates opportunities and
efficiencies impossible with out them.

And we do not have this. Yet.

The Semantic Web was hoping to solve this problem, but the problem
remains. We have a very important world wide system of document
storage and retieval, the WWW. But this data is for human consumption
and, since Web 2.0, for human interaction and interfaces. But the
problem of getting machines to talk to eachother about the most basic
records is yet non-existent.

The Semantic Web was going to fix this. We would have not only
structured documents, but structured data. We would be able to
describe not only records, but the *meaning* of records. The records
would allow machines, which could be given access to *meaning* to
infer other consequences. We were going to have a rich distributed
data environment.

## Key Innvoations

## Where it all Went Wrong

## Academics and Industry

## The Future of the Semantic Web

